[Music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger and today
we're going to have some interesting connections
from mathematics to the reality of the world
around us the physical reality of the world
around us so these two things are more connected
than we might at first think we like to think
that mathematics is an abstract intellectual
activity largely independent of the world but
in fact when we look more closely we see that
we're really obliged to write mathematics down
so we need some space to write mathematics down
and so questions about limitations of space are
actually relevant for us especially when we start
looking at very large numbers which is what we've
been doing in the last few videos so we're going
to see that there's problems arising here when we
start to face the fact that we actually live in
a universe which is bounded in a very intrinsic
way okay so we've been talking about large
numbers and the complexity of large numbers
how efficiently we can write numbers down using
basic arithmetical operations we've seen that
for example a number like zal 10 triangle 10
plus 23 is very efficiently written using this
triangle notation I remind you that the
triangle notation means a tower of 10 10
this means 10 to the 10 to the 10 to the 10 Al
together 10 10 stacked up on top of each other
terms of exponents of exponents and that most
of the numbers less than Zed have the property
that their complexity is actually rather large in
particular much larger than 10 triangle 4 which
is our already an absurdly large number that's
10 to the 10 to the 10 to the 10 we're going to
see that this has ramifications for us because
this number as we'll see roughly very roughly
is sort of commensurable with the potential
possibilities for writing Expressions down in
our universe at least according to our modern
view of how big the universe is and this leads
us to very interesting problems so it suggests
to us that we may have to reconsider a little
bit the nature of numbers what we actually mean
by a number we're going to see that the logical
validity of much of number theory is perhaps
thrown into question and we'll see that size
memory and energy limitations in our world
actually has something to do with mathematics
these two things are not independ dependent so for
most of the videos in this series I'm being very
careful and precise about mathematics and laying
it out in a very clear I hope uh way but every
so often like in this video we're going to go out
a little bit and sort of have a wider view maybe
talk about some adjacent disciplines that will be
necessary and useful for us so today we're going
to touch on some meta mathematical issues Maybe
we could say scientific aspects or philosophical
uh aspects of this uh this kind of question
of complexity and large size things so when
it comes to the philosophy of mathematics there
are of course many schools of thought about the
nature of mathematics but historically
the leading school is almost certainly
platinised which is very roughly that mathematics
lives in an abstract or other worldly realm which
mirrors this world but is separate from it
okay so here is our world with planets and
Suns and particles and cells and creatures and
so on and somewhere else there's this abstract
world of mathematics where we have these ideal
objects number numers and functions and conics
and all the various aspects of pure mathematics
and then there's this idea that there's some kind
of mysterious and beautiful connection between
this abstract world of mathematics and our own
very concrete World okay so this is a very
familiar view and it's a very natural View
and one in fact that I have a lot of sympathy
with so that as you explore mathematics in our
world you can't help but but realize that there
are these remarkable things that are happening
that seem to be happening sort of independent of
actual physical things but this is not the only
possible point of view that one can have about
what mathematics is of course so platonism is
named after Plato the great Greek thinker and
writer lived from 424 to 347 BC and he had a
student Aristotle lived from 384 to 322 BC who
perhaps ultimately had an even greater influence
on the development of Science and logic and
um perhaps mathematics and in recent years
a new kind of philosophy of mathematics called an
Aristotelian realist philosophy of mathematics has
been developed by the so-called Sydney School of
mathematical philosophers led by James Franklin my
colleague at the University of New South Wales
and this theory has been laid out in this 2014
book of gyms an Aristotelian realist philosophy of
mathematics mathematics as the science of quantity
and structure by Paul grave McMillan and in it
Franklin proposes that there is a way of thinking
about mathematics as connecting more with the
real world that mathematics is really contained
in Applied Mathematics and that the patterns of
mathematics the equation of mathematics the ideal
objects of mathematics actually have a life in
the physical world so he writes mathematics is
a direct science of structural features of the
real world like symmetry continuity and raos so
he's looking to place mathematics in the actual
World basically through what we usually call
Applied Mathematics now I've been thinking about
uh James's position and I actually have quite a
lot of sympathy with it I may not agree with
him entirely about everything in fact we had
a debate about the nature of infinity that
may be familiar to you but I think there's
a lot of of good idea here in this alternative to
platinised mathematics in our reality as opposed
to some ideal reality that's out there somewhere
you know in some space outside of our own physical
universe and so this kind of feet on the ground
kind of approach appeals to me and I think it uh
it really ought to be considered as a serious
Contender for thinking about and positioning
mathematics and it's sort of from this point of
view that I'm going to be talking about today so
not exactly following exactly Jim's uh point
of view and I don't claim to have read this
or understood the entire argument but just a
general orientation uh in this Aristotelian
direction of trying to link mathematics with what
actually happens in the real world so I do have a
lot of sympathy with a real world view of the
foundations of mathematics and it also Accords
in my view with some basic principles of science
so in science we generally agree that scientific
objects need to be observable a scientist wants
to be able to register something about an object
before he or she will admit that there actually
is an object there things which are invisible you
can't hear them you can't see them you can't
feel them they don't register at all on your
instruments in any way at all the scientist has
a reluctance to take those things into their
theories they would rather have theories that are
populated by things that one can actually observe
and correspondingly I think there's an argument
to be made that mathematical objects need to be
expressable it's kind of the mathematical
equivalent of scientific objects need to
be observable mathematical objects need to
be expressable we need to be able to write
something down to express a mathematical idea be
it a formula a set a pattern a more complicated
object we want be able to write something down so
that we can show it to other people that people
can critically look at it to make sure that
it actually makes sense just having something
that's a kind of an idea that we don't actually
pin down concretely is not really completely
adequate for my view so with this orientation I'd
like to Now sort of pose some questions for us to
think about the first question is do numbers
exist if they can't be expressed or written
down we can express the number 1437 we can write
down 1 4 3 7 we've expressed that number we can
argue that it exists in some form or another
because we can point to that actual physical
representation on the page we might be able to
represent it in other ways as well but there
are at least some ways of representing that
number but what about numbers perhaps numbers
in quotes which cannot be actually expressed or
written down there's something different about
them and do they really deserve to be part of
the mathematical world and this leads us to the
question does the physical size of the universe
limit the mathematics that is possible in it if
we insist that mathematics is written down then
we need some space to write things down we need
some room whether it's a piece of paper or a
file on a computer but we need some space in
order to express our ideas and then we run
into the possibility that we might end up
considering things which are so big that there's
not actually enough room in the universe in the
physical universe that we're living in here to
express those objects at which point we're back
to this kind of question of what exactly are we
talking about if we're talking about something
which cannot be written down or expressed in
our universe then are we really talking about
mathematics or is it some more Voodoo like subject
so this line of reasoning I think naturally leads
us to the interesting question of how big is
the universe we want to maybe estimate just how
much room is there to write something down in
our universe so I'm now going to make a little
bit of discussion here about physical aspects
of our universe and we're going to make some
very crude and rough estimates I'm not claiming
to be completely accurate here and the accuracy
as you'll see is not entirely important we just
want to get ballpark estimates for things so we
don't really know how big the universe is that's a
fact okay but we do have estimates and we do have
theories about the development of the universe
that allow us to give approximate ideas of how
big it might actually be and I think current uh
ideas of cosmology put the universe's size as
roughly about 100 billion light years across okay
so that's a very large distance I you that a light
year is the extent that a photon can travel in a
year so a photon goes very fast takes 8 minutes
for it to get from the Sun to here on planet Earth
for example and that's 8 minutes and then if you
let that same Photon keep going for an entire year
it obviously goes quite far and that's called a
lightyear and it's a kind of convenient measure
for measuring intergalactic you know spatial kind
of things so roughly 100 billion light years now a
billion is 10 to the 9 so 100 billion light years
would be 10 to the 11 light years now how much is
a lightyear well a lightyear is about 10 to the
16 M so a meter is you maybe something like this
and it's a little bit bigger than a yard if you're
the American system a yard plus 3 in in roughly
is a meter so 10 to the 16 m in a lightyear and
there's 100 billion light years roughly Across the
Universe so we have this very naive picture of the
size of the universe we can model it very roughly
by a cube a cube whose side is around 10 to 30
m because 10 to the 11 light years each light
gear is 10 to the 16 M so that's Al together 10
27 M just multiply those two together and 10 7 is
approximately 10 30 all right so there's a picture
of our universe greatly simplified and we'll
think of it as a cube with sides 10^ 30 m so we've
talked about how big things can get but it's also
important for us to ask about how small things
can can get because in terms of information as we
know with our computers it's not just a question
of how big the computers are it's also a question
of how efficiently we can compress data or bits
how efficiently small we can make hard drives for
example so we can ask the question how small can
things get well a very small thing is an atom and
an atom say hydrogen or helium may be 10 the -1 m
okay now most of that atom is sort of empty space
the actual ingredients of the atom like a Proton
or Neutron or electron are of course much smaller
a Proton or Neutron is roughly about 10us 15 m in
size and an electron is even smaller about 10us
18 M and in terms of subdividing a proton well
we have this idea that proton is made of things
called quart qu so here's a proton with an up up
down Quirk and a quirk is some yet smaller more
Elementary kind of object which no one actually
has seen we don't really have direct evidence of
individual quirks all by themselves but there's
a lot of indirect evidence to support their
existence and we can sort of estimate that
there may be about 10 Theus 20 M so that's
sort of the smallest kind of object that we
have but there's another kind of smallness that's
important in physics and that's what's called the
plank scale that's an even smaller amount of space
10 Theus 35 and that's a very important uh number
so that's sort of the smallest scale that you can
get to before Quantum effects prohibit resolution
so as you get to smaller and smaller things
quantum mechanics plays a greater greater role
in determining what's going on and the physics
of the very very small is wildly different from
the physics that we're used to here on planet
Earth in our realm of things and it's sort of
understood that there's some kind of limit to how
small you can get how fine you can resolve things
the wavelength of light for example uh and there's
a something called an uncertainty principle so
once you get to very small distances you can't
separate effectively the even the space or even
theoretically anymore and this is generally around
10 Theus 35 so the kind of a graininess of space
occurs at this level this is the smallest kind
of resolution that's possible um not just as a
consequence of the power of our instruments it's
really somehow hardwired into the nature of space
itself it's just some obstacle that nature has
that prevents us or anyone from delving deeper
into the nature of space rather deeper than this
particular resolution level so let's consider an
abstract Cube which we'll call a plank Cube just a
theoretical idea of a very very tiny cube of space
which is the smallest possible sort of resolution
size possible before quantum mechanical effects
just disintegrate everything so here's a little
Cube and it's got side 10us 35 M so that's a very
very small cube and so let's perform the following
calculation that imagine that we have a 1 M Square
Cube so 1 M all right by 1 meter by 1 meter right
you could a big big box but not that big and let's
ask how many plank cubes could we fill this thing
with all right so there's our meter cub and we're
subdividing it into lots of uh little segments
each 10 to the - 35 wide so there's one of many
little plank cubes that we've cut our big 1 m box
into so how many such cubes are there going to be
well that's pretty simple because there's 10 to
the 35 cubes that'll be arranged along any one of
these dimensions and there these three dimensions
so we have to take 10 35 * 10 35 * 10 35 which is
approximately 10 100 okay maybe it's a little bit
more but I don't really care I'm just interested
in ballpark estimates here that's roughly 10
to the 100 such cubes can be fit into a 1 m
box and now let's ask a similar kind of question
relating the size of the unit Universe with these
meter boxes how many meter cubes could we
fit into the universe so we've said that
the universe is roughly 10 to the 30 m across so
here's our universe and here's a little meter box
and in any one dimension there are say 10 the 30
such boxes lined up so there's 10 30 10 30 10 30
so all together 10 30 * 10 30 * 10 30 which is
also roughly 10 100 such boxes so this is kind
of interesting first of all that going from our
scale arguably you know Cube box is very much in
our world going from that to the very smallest
possible cube a plank cube is a factor of 10 100
and going from our meter cube to the very biggest
scale that of the entire universe itself is also
roughly of the order of factor of 10 to the 100
so from this sort of logarithmic power exponent
point of view we or the scale that we're at are
roughly balanced between the very smallest things
that one can imagine in our universe and the
Very biggest thing which is the universe itself
we are Som how in the middle and now let's put
this together by asking how many of these plank
cubes could we fit into the entire universe so we
can fit 10 to the 100 of these plank cubes into a
meter box and we can fit 10 100 meter boxes into
the universe and so we can fit 10 100 time 10 100
which is 10 200 plank cubes into our universe very
roughly okay very roughly so this is a very very
rough estimate based on our current understanding
is of the size of the universe and this should be
taken with a grain of salt but it's probably
not wildly inaccurate in terms of our current
knowledge so now I want to talk about being able
to write something down in our universe how much
information can we store in our universe I'm
interested in an upperbound I'm interested in
the maximum possible so here's a hard drive which
will be kind of familiar to you these days right
hard drive like this is U maybe a terabyte okay
that's a a lot of data but we could well imagine
expanding a hard drive making a bigger one and
we can fit more and more data in and perhaps the
ultimate kind of hard drive that one can at
least imagine of course we could never make
this but we can at least perhaps contemplate it
is a hard drive that is so vast that it fills
the entire universe and which is so fine that
we are allowed to write data not at the atomic
level but at the plank scale level so imagine a
entirely fictitious hard drive which occupies the
entire universe and where we're able to write
one of K symbols in each plank Cube we've seen
that the Universe roughly has 10 to the 200
plank cubes it could be subdivided into 10 to
the 200 plank cubes and now imagine that in each
one of these 10 the 200 plank cubes we can write
one of K symbols okay so K possibilities for
that plank Cube k possibilities for the cube
beside it K possibilities for the cube beside it
and for each of the 10 to the 200 plank cubes we
can write a symbol down this is some kind of very
efficient this is much more efficient hard drive
than than than we have on our computers now this
enormously efficient because we're cramming these
things in at such a a scale so how many possible
fillings are there how many possible ways can
we fill this hard drive with these K types of
symbols well the answer is K * K * K * K and so
on all together 10 the 200 times in other words
it's K to the 10 200 that's the total number of
ways that we can fill our hard drive it's the
total number of Expressions that we're able to
write down the total number of possibilities in
terms of these K symbols in our universe now if
K is 16 which we've been talking about we have
this particular alphabet of our 10 digits with
a few operations and some brackets so 16 then this
is 16 to the 10 to the 200 and I want to estimate
this and I want to introduce some slacks so let's
replace a 16 with a 100 so maybe we'll allow some
or symbols some subtraction sign perhaps maybe
a division sign maybe some factorial and maybe
a few you know other kinds of mathematical
symbols that we might want to introduce so we
have 100 symbols now and so the total number
of words or Expressions is now less than or
equal to 100 to the 10 to the 200 now 100 is 10
squared so if we use use our laws of exponents
this is really 10^ 2ar to the 10 200 then it's
really multiplying this exponent by two so it's
really 10 the 2 * 10^ 200 okay so 2 * 10 200 I'm
going to replace that with something that's quite
a lot bigger I'm going to replace it with 10 to
the, right so you will agree that 2 * 10 200 is
a lot less than 10 to the 1,000 because I want
to you know I want to have a lot of room I want
this to be a reasonable estimate so I don't
want anybody arguing well you haven't counted
this quite well enough so I'm expanding this
number enormously by going from here to here
so this is a vast increase so I can very safely
say that the total number of Expressions that you
can write down in our universe using 16 symbols
is far less than 10 to the 10 to the 10 to the
three and this is well it's bigger than 10
triangle 3 if there wasn't a three there it
would be 10 triangle 3 so this is quite a lot
bigger than 10 triangle 3 but it's nowhere near
10 triangle 4 10 triangle 4 would be what would
happen if we replace this three with a 10 instead
of having 10 Cub instead of having a th here as
an exponent we would have 10 to the 10 which is 10
billion as the exponent there yeah that' be a huge
jump so this is yet another approximation that's
saying that the total number of words in our
universe uh treated as a plank scale hard drive
is going to be less than 10 triangle 4 and this is
very crude but this is a reason why I think this
number is being somewhat commensurable with the
amount of complexity possible in our universe so
so our known universe supports at most 10 triangle
4 distinct Expressions this is an upper limit to
the number of different things that you can write
down number of different Expressions that you can
write down so most of the numbers from 1 to zed
zed being 10 triangle 10 + 23 cannot be written
down in our universe this is the claim that I was
making a video or two ago so I was claiming that
this number it's very big but it's not as big as
other numbers that way could easily write down
but it has the property that most of the numbers
less than this thing here we saw that it their
complexity was greater than 10 triangle 4 if their
complexity is greater than 10 triangle 4 it means
that they cannot be written down it means these
numbers that we're talking about have the property
that they're impossible to express in our universe
so conclusion most of these numbers do not in fact
exist is this a daring conclusion they do not
in fact exist they cannot even be defined or
specified we're talking about them in a way that
assumes that they already exist so we and I have
been saying all along that we consider all the
numbers from 1 to Z assuming that that already
makes sense but that's now quite questionable to
what extent do these things exist to what extent
does it make sense to talk about all the numbers
from one to Z if most of them are impossible to
write down in pretty well any kind of arithmetical
system that you can imagine so the phrase all the
numbers from one to zed is problematic or
maybe dubious or maybe in fact it's just
nonsense so I think this uh this line of reasoning
this appreciation that mathematics is something
that you have to write down it's connected with
the real world mathematics which cannot be written
down which cannot be connected with with the
real world in some fashion or another is not
really mathematics it's something else some
kind of fairy tale some like some spiritual
discussion about The Fifth Dimension and you know
various goblins and ghosts that are there on the
Fifth Dimension and no one can see them no one
can visualize them hear them register them on
any kind of scientific instruments it's just in
our minds that's sort of at the level that we're
venturing towards when we talk so confidently
about all the numbers from one to Zed and then
of course what about all the numbers from Zed
to Infinity well what about them okay what are
we talking about here are we making any sense at
all in our next video we're going to have to go
further and we going to have to talk about you
know infinity and does this word have any real
meaning in our world the discussion that we've
had today I think gives us a firm footing upon
which to talk about that I hope you'll join me
for that I'm Norman wildberger thanks for [Music]
listening